this is the portrait of lady Agnew by
John Singer Sargent it's one of the most
popular portraits in the gallery's
collection it was the portrait that
helped launch sergeant as a portrait
painter in Britain and was also the
portrait which launched lady Agnew in
society according to legend she walked
into the studio one day and slumped down
in a chair and sergeant really liked to
capture the most naturalistic poster for
his sitters and so he decided to paint
the portrait exactly as she was on that
first day the painting was a hybrid of
English aestheticism and French
Impressionism
and was expected to look at the portrait
and think of it not just as a portrait
but as a pleasing aesthetic object
what we get here is an almost effortless
paint application that it appears that
he's gone in he's understood the sitter
he's applied the paint and it's just
sort of happened but as is generally the
case with works by Sargent when you
start looking much more closely you
realize that there's a has been a
struggle within the process and that
there is a myriad of small adjustments
small changes so for example on lady
Agnew when you start looking closely
around this the sash area you start to
see where the artist has made changes
where does how high do the sash go up
how tight has small as the waist is this
an exaggeration we don't know but he
certainly has spent some time redefining
that that area similarly with the
pendant you can just about see here a
slight shadow which indicates that the
pendant at some point was actually
hanging lower so he obviously felt from
a visual perspective it made more sense
it balanced better by having the pendant
hanging at a higher height we also see
some alterations in this area here and
also some repositioning around the
neckline where the artist has gone back
and redefined the outline and possibly
even down the side of the face the face
is much more carefully painted than the
rest of the portrait however the
portrait is generally designed to be
seen at a distance so if you look into
closely at the detail you see that it's
the details like the flowers on the
chair
very roughly painted but when you move
away from the portrait they come
together and they look like proper
flowers
when this was first painted it was in
high demand for known allegedly the
story goes that on loan to the Grafton
gallery on its return sustained a damage
a tear in fact in this part of in this
part of the painting close examination
now we know there is a tear there it's
obviously been repaired a long time ago
the owner was really quite annoyed and
there's an excellent quote where he says
they bay that is the Grafton gallery
they were anxious enough to get my most
valued picture and to reap the benefit
of its presence on their walls but as
soon as they have done with it they show
a singular indifference to the safe
delivery to the owner lady Agnew was
around about 26 or 27
when this portrait was done and she has
this very kind of dominating presence a
lot of people find her pose very
seductive although we know that at the
time she actually was suffering from
this very long illness spite the fact
she looks quite fragile in this painting
she was really quite a feisty individual
and she was what one might describe as a
new woman of the late 19th century she
led a very extravagant lifestyle and if
actually spent a lot of the Agnew
fortune and in the end she was rather
sadly obliged to sell the painting in
order to make some money for herself
you